# python-nearest-neighbors
This Python program finds the 2 nearest neighbors out of a set of 2D points with (x, y) coordinates. The naive algorithm  looks at every combination of pairs and has time complexity of O(n^2).  The fast algorithm has time complexity of O(n log n).  The points are recursively split in half, with a recursion base case of 3 points that is solved by brute force. When merging the results of two recursive calls that return minimum distances, the program checks for cases with one point in each of the halves that was examined by a respective recursive call. A simple optimization filters the compared points by throwing away points that are more than the returned minimum distance from the median line between the two halves of points. A harder opimization orders the filtered points by y coordinate, and then compares each point with the next 7 points.  The number 7 comes from a total of 8 points being in a region that has a width of twice the minimum distance and a height of the minimum distance. At the beginning of the algorithm, two lists are generated such that each has a copy of all of the points. A first list orders all points by x.  A second list orders all points by y.  Then the points do not have to be sorted in order again. When making the recursive calls, along with an argument of half of the points (one half on each side of the median line), other arguments are the points sorted by x coordinate, and the points sorted by y coordinate.  The points that are in the list sorted by y coordinate, are the points in the list sorted by x coordinate. A minor optimization uses a hash table to split the list of points sorted by corrdinate.
